gh-92788: Add docs for `ast.Module`, `ast.Expression`, and others (#101055)
python/cpython: Doc/library/ast.rst

    Snakes <https://greentreesnakes.readthedocs.io/en/latest/>`__ project and

>     all its contributors.
> 
> Root nodes

Reviewer: Oh, and you may as well:

```suggestion
    all its contributors.

.. _ast-root-nodes:

Root nodes
```

^^^^^^^^^^

.. class:: Module(body, type_ignores)

>    A Python module. Body contains a list of module's statements.

Reviewer: Assuming `body` is referring to the *body* parameter, then you should write:

```suggestion
   A Python module.
   
   *body* is a :class:`list` of the module's :ref:`ast-statements`.
```

* Use correct capitalization, formatting and wording for parameters
* Format and cross-reference the data type
* Link the section that actually explicitly lists and describes the statement types (and clarify this means statement _nodes_, not literal Python statements)
* Fix minor grammar issue (missing `the`)

You'll also need to add an `ast-statements` ref target label above the `Statements` section, i.e.

```rst
.. _ast-statements:

Statements
^^^^^^^^^^
```

   .. doctest::

        >>> print(ast.dump(ast.parse('x = 1'), indent=4))
        Module(
            body=[
                Assign(
                    targets=[
                        Name(id='x', ctx=Store())],
                    value=Constant(value=1))],
            type_ignores=[])

.. class:: Expression(body)

   A single Python expression.

   .. doctest::

        >>> print(ast.dump(ast.parse('123', mode='eval'), indent=4))
        Expression(
            body=Constant(value=123))

.. class:: Interactive(body)

>    A single Python interactive statement, just like in :ref:`tut-interac`.

Reviewer: Is "just" needed/appropriate here? It changes the meaning to say that this is "similar to" the statements parsed in interactive mode, rather than actually being the AST node use for such (isn't it?)

```suggestion
   A single Python interactive statement, like in :ref:`tut-interac`.
```

   .. doctest::

        >>> print(ast.dump(ast.parse('x = 1; y = 2', mode='single'), indent=4))
        Interactive(
            body=[
                Assign(
                    targets=[
                        Name(id='x', ctx=Store())],
                    value=Constant(value=1)),
                Assign(
                    targets=[
                        Name(id='y', ctx=Store())],
                    value=Constant(value=2))])

.. class:: FunctionType(argtypes, returns)

>    Special type to represent old-style type comments for functions.
> 
>    Python versions prior to 3.6 used to annotate functions like this::

Reviewer: I was a little confused here, even after several re-reads, because the sentences aren't explicitly connected and read somewhat disjointed to me. Furthermore, the "Python versions" themselves didn't annotate functions in a different style, rather older Python versions didn't support _users_ employing actual PEP 484 annotations, so instead users had to fall back to comments.

Also, weren't type annotations introduced in Python 3.5, per PEP 484 (PEP-484), not 3.6?

To try to fix these issues:

```suggestion
   Special type to represent old-style type comments for functions,
   as Python versions prior to 3.5 didn't support :pep:`484` annotations.

   Such type comments would look like this::
```

       def sum_two_number(a, b):
           # type: (int, int) -> int
           return a + b

   .. doctest::

        >>> print(ast.dump(ast.parse('(int, str) -> List[int]', mode='func_type'), indent=4))
        FunctionType(
            argtypes=[
                Name(id='int', ctx=Load()),
                Name(id='str', ctx=Load())],
            returns=Subscript(
                value=Name(id='List', ctx=Load()),
                slice=Name(id='int', ctx=Load()),

>                 ctx=Load()))
> 
> Literals

Reviewer: ```suggestion
                ctx=Load()))

Literals
```

    Snakes <https://greentreesnakes.readthedocs.io/en/latest/>`__ project and
    all its contributors.

.. _ast-root-nodes:

Root nodes
^^^^^^^^^^

.. class:: Module(body, type_ignores)

   A Python module.

>    *body* is a :class:`list` of the module's :ref:`ast-statements`.
>    *type_ignores* is a :class:`list` of the module's type ignore comments,
>    see :func:`ast.parse` for more details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   *body* is a :class:`list` of the module's :ref:`ast-statements`.

   *type_ignores* is a :class:`list` of the module's type ignore comments;
   see :func:`ast.parse` for more details.
```

* Put them on separate lines for easily scanability
* Fix grammar error (comma splice)

   .. doctest::

        >>> print(ast.dump(ast.parse('x = 1'), indent=4))
        Module(
            body=[
                Assign(
                    targets=[
                        Name(id='x', ctx=Store())],
                    value=Constant(value=1))],
            type_ignores=[])

.. class:: Expression(body)

   A single Python expression.

>    *body* is a single :ref:`ast-expressions` node.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   *body* is a single node,
   one of the :ref:`expression types <ast-expressions>`.
```

* Make the sentence grammatical with the injected reference
* Clarify that we're referring to a set of types rather than a literal `Expression` type (i.e. this node class)

   .. doctest::

        >>> print(ast.dump(ast.parse('123', mode='eval'), indent=4))
        Expression(
            body=Constant(value=123))

.. class:: Interactive(body)

>    A single Python interactive statement, like in :ref:`tut-interac`.

Reviewer: This appears to be slightly contradictory—the first line states that this is a _single_ statement, while both *body* and the given example contain multiple statements. Maybe this would resolve the apparent contradiction?

```suggestion
   A single Python interactive line, like in :ref:`tut-interac`.
```

Not sure; could use a look from a subject matter expert like @isidentical

>    *body* is a :class:`list` of :ref:`ast-statements` nodes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   *body* is a :class:`list` of :ref:`statement nodes <ast-statements>`.
```

* Fix grammar
* Clarify that we're referring to a list of note types rather than a literal node class `Statement`

   .. doctest::

        >>> print(ast.dump(ast.parse('x = 1; y = 2', mode='single'), indent=4))
        Interactive(
            body=[
                Assign(
                    targets=[
                        Name(id='x', ctx=Store())],
                    value=Constant(value=1)),
                Assign(
                    targets=[
                        Name(id='y', ctx=Store())],
                    value=Constant(value=2))])

.. class:: FunctionType(argtypes, returns)

>    Special type to represent old-style type comments for functions,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   A representation of an old-style type comments for functions,
```

Simplify sentence and avoid repeating "type" and overloading it to mean two different things a few words apart.

   as Python versions prior to 3.5 didn't support :pep:`484` annotations.

   Such type comments would look like this::

       def sum_two_number(a, b):
           # type: (int, int) -> int
           return a + b

>    *argtypes* is a :class:`list` of :ref:`ast-expressions` nodes.
>    *returns* is a single :ref:`ast-expressions` node.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   *argtypes* is a :class:`list` of :ref:`expression nodes <ast-expressions>`.

   *returns* is a single :ref:`expression node <ast-expressions>`.
```

* Make this grammatical
* Clarity that we are linking to expression node types rather than the `ast.Expression` node
* Put separate parameters on separate lines for scannability

    Snakes <https://greentreesnakes.readthedocs.io/en/latest/>`__ project and
    all its contributors.

.. _ast-root-nodes:

Root nodes
^^^^^^^^^^

.. class:: Module(body, type_ignores)

>    A Python module.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   A Python module, as with :ref:`file input <file-input>`.
   Node type generated by :func:`ast.parse` in the default ``"exec"`` *mode*.
```

May as well be explicit here, too, and consistent with the others, by mentioning the parsing mode.

Also, explicitly state and cross-reference the language reference for more details, like the others.

   *body* is a :class:`list` of the module's :ref:`ast-statements`.

   *type_ignores* is a :class:`list` of the module's type ignore comments;
   see :func:`ast.parse` for more details.

   .. doctest::

        >>> print(ast.dump(ast.parse('x = 1'), indent=4))
        Module(
            body=[
                Assign(
                    targets=[
                        Name(id='x', ctx=Store())],
                    value=Constant(value=1))],
            type_ignores=[])

.. class:: Expression(body)

>    A single Python expression.

Reviewer 2: Can we also mention that this node type will be generated when the mode `eval` is passed to `ast.parse` for helping people figure out what is the difference among the root nodes?

Reviewer: FWIW, the example does show this, though no harm mentioning it explicitly, I suppose.

Reviewer: If we're going to do this here, might also make sense to be consistent and do it for the rest, no? Or is there something special about `Expression`/`eval`? Personally, I found `Interactive`/`single` to be the most non-obvious of the bunch, since there's no obvious connection between those two words.

In fact, I somehow completely missed seeing it myself in the example when I was testing something in connection with your comment below, thus being a counterpoint to my own here :joy: (though that also had to do with the valid values of the *mode* argument to `ast.parse` not being documented).

Reviewer 2: Yep, I think we should mention it both places. The general mode is well known but function type / eval / single is not really known.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   A single Python :ref:`expression input <expression-input>`.
   Node type generated by :func:`ast.parse` when *mode* is ``"eval"``.
```

As suggested, added here and elsewhere.

Also, clarify and cross-reference terminology here, as was done previously for interactive input.

   *body* is a single node,
   one of the :ref:`expression types <ast-expressions>`.

   .. doctest::

        >>> print(ast.dump(ast.parse('123', mode='eval'), indent=4))
        Expression(
            body=Constant(value=123))

.. class:: Interactive(body)

>    A single interactive input, like in :ref:`tut-interac`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   A single :ref:`interactive input <interactive>`, like in :ref:`tut-interac`.
   Node type generated by :func:`ast.parse` when *mode* is ``"single"``.
```

Explicitly state when this node type is produced, and link the section in the language reference defining/describing interactive input.

>    A single Python interactive line, like in :ref:`tut-interac`.

Reviewer 2: This doesn't necessarily mean a line, but rather a single interactive input. Not sure if we have an official term for it, but I think we can use the same description as the `compile()`:

```suggestion
   A single interactive statement, like in :ref:`tut-interac`.
```

Reviewer: IIRC, it originally read as in your suggestion, but I found it rather confusing and contradictory, because (as stated on the very next line):

> *body* is a `list` of statement nodes

We're simultaneously saying that an `Interactive` node instance is "a _single_ interactive statement" and (composed of) "a list of statement nodes", which is naturally confusing and seemingly contradictory.

As I understand it, it is the former that is not really correct, because an interactive input can consist of an arbitrary number of statements separated by `;`, and `ast.parse` will handle this accordingly, e.g.

```python
>>> ast.parse("a = 1; b = 2", mode="single")
<ast.Interactive object at 0x00000000028A92D0>
>>> ast.parse("a = 1; b = 2", mode="single").__dict__
{'body': [<ast.Assign object at 0x00000000036D6560>, <ast.Assign object at 0x00000000036D67D0>]}
```

Therefore, unless someone comes up with a better word, it would seem the best we can do is:

```suggestion
   A single interactive input, like in :ref:`tut-interac`.
```

Reviewer 2: > As I understand it, it is the former that is not really correct, because an interactive input can consist of an arbitrary number of statements separated by ;, and ast.parse will handle this accordingly, e.g.

This is why I preferred to use "interactive statement" rather than "a statement". As far as I can tell, that's the official name we have been using for the `compile()` function.

> As I understand it, it is the former that is not really correct, because an interactive input can consist of an arbitrary number of statements separated by ;, and ast.parse will handle this accordingly, e.g.

An arbitrary number of 'simple statements' (e.g. statements without any sort of nesting / body block) or a single compound statement. So if we go into the details it becomes even more complex to describe.
https://github.com/python/cpython/blob/b53bad6dd08db78f5b5e2f41bea69c4b657fca13/Grammar/python.gram#L101-L105

In any case, I think I'd be fine with `interactive input` since that is still more cleaner than a single line (which is untrue).

Reviewer: > This is why I preferred to use "interactive statement" rather than "a statement". As far as I can tell, that's the official name we have been using for the compile() function.

Hmm, I see. Still, though, it seems likely that readers would not understand "interactive statement" as a distinct term that means something more specific than just "a statement at the interactive prompt" (as I did), unless it is at minimum marked up and actually defined/linked to a definition. Besides single usage of the phrase "interactive statement" in the `compile()` function doc, as you mention, in the description of `"single"` argument to the `mode` parameter (which doesn't define it), I couldn't find any other mentions, much less definitions of that specific term in the Python docs either with the built-in search or Google. Thus, overloaded as it is, it reads as a _prima facie_ contradiction with the next sentence, with obvious confusion potential.

> An arbitrary number of 'simple statements' (e.g. statements without any sort of nesting / body block) or a single compound statement. So if we go into the details it becomes even more complex to describe.

Ah right, of course—thanks :+1: 

> In any case, I think I'd be fine with `interactive input` since that is still more cleaner than a single line (which is untrue).

Indeed, and while I hadn't found it before, "interactive input" is in fact the term used for this [in the language reference](https://docs.python.org/3.12/reference/toplevel_components.html#interactive-input):

> ## 9.3. Interactive input
>
> Input in interactive mode is parsed using the following grammar:
>
> ```ebnf
> interactive_input ::= [ stmt_list ] NEWLINE | compound_stmt NEWLINE
> ```

Reviewer 2: Ah, that's a very nice find indeed! I'm sold on "interactive input", let's go for it!

   *body* is a :class:`list` of :ref:`statement nodes <ast-statements>`.

   .. doctest::

        >>> print(ast.dump(ast.parse('x = 1; y = 2', mode='single'), indent=4))
        Interactive(
            body=[
                Assign(
                    targets=[
                        Name(id='x', ctx=Store())],
                    value=Constant(value=1)),
                Assign(
                    targets=[
                        Name(id='y', ctx=Store())],
                    value=Constant(value=2))])

.. class:: FunctionType(argtypes, returns)

>    A representation of an old-style type comments for functions,
>    as Python versions prior to 3.5 didn't support :pep:`484` annotations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   A representation of an old-style type comments for functions,
   as Python versions prior to 3.5 didn't support :pep:`484` annotations.
   Node type generated by :func:`ast.parse` when *mode* is ``"func_type"``.
```

Implement the suggestion to mention the mode explicitly.

>    as Python versions prior to 3.5 didn't support :pep:`484` annotations.

Reviewer 2: The term ast.parse uses is “signature type comments” (as per PEP 484), I don't think we have to go into the detail of why they are useful here (like the 3.5 part) but just mention it is a side effect of the mode `func_type`.

Author: I think we should. I spend quite a lot of time working on `typing`. And even I was not quite sure what it is.

I am sure that regular users do not know any use-cases for it. So, providing the main one seems like a good thing.

Reviewer 3: Agree, I never figured out what this was for either.
